[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> "Thinking Allowed."
Conversations on the leading
edge of knowledge and discovery
with psychologist
Jeffrey Mishlove.
>> Hello and welcome,
I'm Jeffrey Mishlove.
Today we are going to explore
body, place, and nature
in a hypermodern world.
My guest is Charlene Spretnak,
author of "States of Grace"
and other books, including "Lost
Goddesses of Early Greece,"
"Green Politics," "Spiritual
Dimensions of Green Politics,"
and "States of Grace."
She is on the faculty in
philosophy and religion
at the California Institute
of Integral Studies.
Welcome, Charlene.
>> Thank you.
>> It's a pleasure
to be with you.
We think of our world as being
a modern world and sometimes
a hyper world, but I don't
think people appreciate
the extent to which
our lives are totally
colored by what you refer
to and other scholars refer
to as modernity.
>> Well that's true, and I
discovered that after my last
book, "States of Grace,"
because it also addressed crises
of modernity, but from the
vantage point of what the great
spiritual traditions
have to add to--
or trying to think our
way out of these problems.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> And so when I was on the
book tour for that book,
I would talk about modernity
and the modern condition
and the modern world view, and
many people would come up to me
afterwards and say, that
was really interesting.
I've never thought
about modernity,
it was all new to me.
And that was shocking to
me, because that was 1991.
We were well into it, we
were 400 years into it
at that point.
So when I wrote the
"Resurgence of the Real,"
I realized I needed to put an
appendix in the back called,
"Modernity is to us
as water to a fish."
It's just the way we're
raised, it's around us,
we're taught that the
modern condition is simply
the state the human race
gets to at a certain point,
but I in that
appendix spelled out
all the characteristics
of modernity
and the modern world
view, which were
a creation of Western culture--
>> Didn't always exist.
>> --certain decisions.
>> Yeah.
>> Right.
We made certain
cultural decisions,
and now we can rethink them.
Do we want to stick with this
particular set of assumptions
or realize that some of it
hasn't worked out very well?
>> And what are the fundamental
assumptions of modernity?
>> Well for one thing, the human
is viewed as Homo economicus.
That we are essentially
the economic animal.
And that's the core of
the important interactions
and everything else sort
of forms around that.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> And also we have blind
faith and progressivism,
that the technological fix
is always going to deliver us
to a better time and place.
So there's really no
point in studying history
or any kind of
oppositional movements
that thought there was something
wrong with this, because we
just have to keep focused
on this trajectory
and believe it will always--
>> So economics, business,
technology, progress,
the rugged individual.
>> Definitely a focus
on the individual.
Not a very group-oriented
focus, because the autonomous
individual was an invention
of the birth of modernity.
And that became the
focus in the 18th century
and our whole
modern legal system,
and then of course, the
mechanistic worldview,
a mechanistic view of the body
from the Scientific Revolution
in the 16th and 17th century.
Our whole modern
medical system has
evolved to fit that
biomechanical image
of the body.
>> Yet you describe these
things, and of course,
we're surrounded by
them, they're endemic.
And at the same
time, it's almost as
if your description is a
caricature of what's happening,
because it is changing.
The system does have, I think--
and you point out,
it has the capacity
to laugh at itself, to
alter itself in some ways.
>> Yes, with lots of
blood, sweat, and tears.
It took 350 years to challenge
the mechanistic model
of the body with any success.
And I feel that the
characteristics of modernity
are both intensifying
and being corrected
by the corrective effort.
So my book is actually
about the good news.
It's about all the things that
have happened in the 1990s,
since then, just before then,
really that period the closing
of the Millennium
where modernity
took a very unexpected
turn and a lot
of the creative and corrective
efforts finally broke through.
So the focus of the
resurgence of the real
puts the emphasis on body,
nature, place, our physicality,
and how its true
nature poked holes
through this etiology of
modernity in recent decades.
>> Of course, people have been
poking holes in it for a long
time, most notably the romantic
movement of the 19th century.
>> Well there's a long lineage
of very astute critics who said
the mechanistic worldview
is clearly not the truth
of our whole totality of being.
We can and need deep
communion with the rest
of the natural world.
But these were able
to be marginalized
by modernity and
modern schooling
until certain things
just fell into position
in the second half of the 1990s.
For instance, with regard
to the mechanistic model
of the body and
modern medicine, a lot
of people for the
previous 20, 30 years
had been trying to
say, look, there's
something to these alternative
and complementary therapies.
There's something more
going on than just the body
as a machine.
>> But the medical propaganda
establishment to delegitimize
those areas is just enormous.
>> Yes, they could
cast dispersions,
and more importantly, the AMA
was the advisor to the medical
insurance industry.
And so they always said,
don't pay any of those quacks,
just give up on us
all the business,
we're the grown-ups here, and
so that worked pretty well.
>> It's Interesting how they
take a word like quack and use
it with such effectiveness
against what we now know to be
many legitimate
forms of healing.
>> Well, the way that's finally
been accepted is something that
none of us could have predicted.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> And when the Clinton
administration in the first
term tried to get through
managed competition--
not even a single-payer system,
but was defeated in trying
to get managed competition by
the medical insurance industry,
the medical insurance industry
then said to Washington, look,
we can handle this.
We know the prices
are skyrocketing
and the government can't
afford to pay this anymore,
but we can take care of
this with no regulation,
so just leave it to us.
And at that point, they
pushed aside the AMA
and took a good hard look at
25 years of accumulated studies
on complementary and
alternative therapies,
and they not only begrudgingly
started paying for them,
they started urging their
subscribers to use them.
And they pushed the FDA to
reclassify acupuncture needles
out of the experimental
category into a category
in which licensed
practitioners can use them
in general practice.
>> Because they saw that there
could be an economic benefit.
>> Exactly.
Because particularly when the
alternative or complementary
therapies are matched up with
certain illnesses and ailments,
the results are
very efficacious.
Cheaper, as you say, they have
better patient follow-through,
they follow the whole
cycle of treatment
because they're less invasive.
So right away in 1995, they
start really pushing this
with the American public.
And I was shown-- one
of my students brought
in a newsletter from
Blue Shield that goes out
across the country
with the bills,
and it urged everyone,
all the subscribers
to learn vipassana meditation,
mindfulness meditation.
It didn't use the
word vipassana,
that would be too foreign.
But it said, learn the
mindfulness meditation
techniques, it lowers
the blood pressure
and it went on and listed
everything it does,
but the books at the end of the
article were all in vipassana.
So I never thought I would
see that in my lifetime.
>> It does represent a
very significant shift.
>> Yeah, it's coming
from Blue Shield.
And so starting,
then, in 1995, what
we have is an experiential
wave of people
at the grassroots
getting acupuncture
or some other kind of
alternative therapy,
and they might say, well, I
don't know the theory behind it
and understand why it
worked, but it works.
So I guess the body must be some
kind of energy system instead
of just a bio machine.
And that's extremely
significant,
because for 350
years, nothing had
been able to budge the
mechanistic model of the body.
And now, the medical
establishment
has sort of been dragged
kicking and screaming
into recognizing this.
And the medical journals
have these articles
saying, look, here are the basic
10 complementary therapies,
you have to know what they are,
you better know what illnesses
they particularly are
good for, because you're
going to have to be
working with them.
So it's a huge sea change.
>> One could even go so far
as to say that the field
of medicine is now leading
the way in terms of one
of the vanguard cultural
movements looking at a more
holistic perspective,
incorporating consciousness.
>> Well I suppose so.
They're reluctant rebels.
I mean, of course
there are still
a lot of people within the field
who oppose it tooth and nail,
but it's happening.
>> Who would have thought?
>> Really.
>> And ironically, I would
have imagined it would be sort
of the academics-- the
universities leading the way,
but I think they're still
behind many, many other areas.
>> Well, some of the med schools
now have courses educating
these students on
these therapies.
>> I think it's
important to point out,
modernity happened
also for reasons.
There were cultural antecedents.
It was, in effect,
a rebellion against
the dogmatic
authoritarian control
of the theocratic
establishment, in effect.
>> Yes, that's right.
I mean, to go back to the
history of where modernity came
from, it did arise at the
end of the Middle Ages,
and it happened
with a succession
of four movements which became
foundational for the way
we think.
>> We'll come to
those, Charlene,
after we take a break.
>> All right.
>> We'll be right back.
Welcome back to
"Thinking Allowed,"
I'm your host, Jeffrey Mishlove.
My guest today is
Charlene Spretnak,
author of "The
Resurgence of the Real."
We're looking at body, place,
and nature in a hypermodern
world.
And Charlene, you
were describing
right before our
break this transition
from a medieval world
view to a modern world
view that took place about
400 or 500 years ago.
And you mentioned there
were four primary qualities
of that transition.
>> Right.
I think it's a shame that
schoolchildren apparently
are not apprised of
this, because you
can see how our
thinking came out
of this cultural
succession of movements.
The first was
renaissance humanism.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> And as you mentioned, there
was a great impulse to get out
from under the control of the
kind and the church who really
had everything wrapped up.
>> To the extent that Galileo
was imprisoned for just
for looking through his
telescope and reporting what he
saw.
>> Yes.
And actually, it's
quite interesting
to talk about the
Copernican Revolution, too.
But let me start
with the first one.
With the Renaissance
humanism, they
wanted to get some distance
from that control of the Church,
and so they said,
let's look back
to the Greeks, that's really
the earliest source of Western
thought, this secular
tradition with the Greeks.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> And they were swinging,
but as you can see,
in all four of these movements,
I'm going to talk about
the reactive swing
was a little too far.
A lot of value got dismissed
pretty aggressively.
And so the motto "Man is
the measure of all things"
replaced the medieval
cosmological sense
of the creation as a whole
and our part in that.
And then with the second
one, the Reformation,
Martin Luther, of
course, correctly
pointed out that Rome was
correctly selling indulgences,
and there was also a push
of the new nationalism.
Why are we under the
control of the Italians?
So--
>> Let's just-- so for benefit
of our viewers who may not
know, what is an indulgence?
>> Oh.
Well, I can tell you
that as a Cradle Catholic
as they call us.
It was-- it's a practice
whereby you could do good deeds
or say a certain
amount of prayers
very deeply and
contemplatively and then
receive a blessing such that you
would get sprung from Purgatory
a little earlier.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> I mean, everybody figured
that unless you were a saint,
you weren't going
straight to Heaven.
But if you weren't really bad,
you weren't going to Hell,
and so the Catholics had this
middle ground, Purgatory,
where you had to
spend some time in it,
and it was an unpleasant place.
So you could sort of knock
off some of your sentence
by these good deeds or prayers.
But in that period,
it became more of a--
you give a thank
you to the priest
and in the form of some cash.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> So this was, of course,
totally corrupt and against
the spirit of it, and Luther
was so right to object to that.
But the Reformation in the
1500s also put a new emphasis
on the individual which was
not present in Western culture
before, because
he said, you don't
need these priests and nuns
and communion of saints.
The only thing that's important
is the direct relationship
between the individual and God.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> And so that became another
piece in the mosaic that was--
>> And it's interesting, because
we took that and turned it
into a secular form
of individualism,
whereas it sounds as if what
Luther was saying was very much
akin to what the ancient
gnostics were saying,
something profoundly spiritual.
>> Right.
But actually, it's
the movement that
came just after that, the
Scientific Revolution,
that the world is just
dead matter working
on mechanistic
principles, God sort of
gave it a little
push at the beginning
to get the universe going,
but other than that,
it works like a clockwork, and
we can have dominion over it
by learning these laws.
So the combination of the
emphasis on an individual
and the mechanistic world
view in the 18th century
became the application of
this scientific worldview
to all our institutions.
>> So if Protestantism ever had
a chance to become an authentic
gnostic movement, it
was blown at that point.
>> Well, it's interesting.
The different versions of
it moving out from Luther
were more extreme than he
was on just every count.
The Virgin Mary, everything,
and making a direct break--
radical break,
things intensified
as they do in revolutions.
So then we had, as I say, the
scientism in the 18th century.
>> Yes.
>> Everything had
to be mechanistic.
Educational systems, garden
design in 18th century France
is that awful grid
whipping nature
into shape with those
formal grid gardens,
and to focus on the
autonomous individual.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> And this becomes so
central in modernity,
that's why in modern novels, the
hero always has to leave home,
place, clan, the
bioregion, religion,
and go to the city where he
can be completely anonymous
and an autonomous individual.
>> But usually he returns
back home at some point.
>> Sometimes.
Certainly a lot of the writers
did, I was going to say,
who would go to the
cities and then come back
to write about their place.
>> Mm-hmm.
So these are the qualities,
then, the scientism,
the individuality, the humanism,
and the birth of cities
and a loss of community.
>> Mm-hmm.
Well, there's a good side
to everything you said.
I mean, individuality,
but individualism
means the most
important thing is not
that you are embedded
in relationships,
but rather that you imagine that
you're this autonomous being
cut off, which is not the way
it works in this universe.
Everything's very
suddenly interconnected.
So it's the escape.
The modern theme is
the escape from nature,
the escape from religion,
the escape from family.
>> The escape from our bodies.
>> Exactly.
>> Mm-hmm.
We get caught up in a world
of ideas, of intellect.
>> Right.
What's important
is the mind and it
has sort of this dragged
around by this dumb body.
I mean, kids get that
message rather early
on in modern schooling.
>> Yeah.
Now I have to say as a child
of the '60s, of course,
the whole
consciousness movement,
the psychedelic movement of
the '60s, the protest movement,
all of those things
were to a large degree
a rebellion against modernity.
>> That is one of the corrective
movements that's part of this
lineage.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> And I was there myself,
and well do I remember how
anti-intellectual it was because
we felt that this rationalism,
this march of words across the
page couldn't possibly express
all the complexity
and subtlety of being.
But because of the strong
anti-intellectual tenor
to that movement, we completely
missed our predecessors.
Coleridge, for instance,
was a great philosopher
of the romantics.
He had a lot to say that
we really could have used,
but it was as if we were
reinventing the wheel.
We really didn't understand
a lot of our predecessors
except Blake was
quoted here and there.
>> And without that
self-understanding,
many revolutionary movements or
even evolutionary movements end
up taking on many of the very
characteristics that they think
they're rebelling against.
>> Well, they're often co-opted,
and they would have more
strength if, for instance, we
had realized that behind us we
had the critique of the
modernist philosophers
and poets.
The arts and crafts movement.
William Morris, Ruskin,
the cosmological schools
of painting at the
turn of the century,
Gandhi's constructive
movement, all of those
specifically critiqued
these assumptions
of a modern
mechanistic world view.
>> You also, if I
understand you correctly,
equate modernity with a
patriarchal worldview.
>> Well, some scholars have
noticed that in that shift
around the time of the
Scientific Revolution,
there was, as one of the
professors called it,
a hyper-masculinizing
of thought.
So the older relational sense of
the creation the medieval time
was replaced with people
who could successfully
keep emotion out of any
thought, as if you could.
I mean, we know now the
studies on the brain,
there's a very subtle
emotional response
before every thought
that's perceived
below the level
of consciousness.
So what emerged to
be the proper way
to behave in the
public sphere is
the way that fit
more comfortably
with the masculine
socialization.
So that's why the
modern world is
said to be a good
fit for most men,
and I discovered that
when I sent my book
proposal to an old
friend from college who's
a vice president of a university
hospital, and in his own words,
I'm a bureaucrat
and a damn good one.
And so I sent the book proposal
with all these critiques
of modernity and the
corrective movements,
and he just hit the ceiling.
He said, what is wrong with you?
Critiquing modernity?
I mean, what-- this is who
we are, it's what we are.
And some people's identity is
very closely wrapped up in it.
And so the critique
is very uncomfortable,
but we need to go in some
different directions.
It's still a big fight to win.
>> It reminds me, I suppose, of
the scene in the movie "Gandhi"
where a British officer says,
what do you mean give up India?
India is British.
>> Right.
>> But modernity is falling
apart of its own course.
I mean, the corrections
to which you point out--
the resurgence of the
real, of body, of nature,
these things are happening
in ways that are amazing us.
>> That's true.
And with regard to
place, for instance,
modern international
law is finally
changing after a very long time.
Because the political
theory of the modern state
did not in any way recognize
the ancient nations,
people rooted in place.
>> Yes.
>> And the definition of
a nation is an indigenous
or longstanding cultural entity,
but then the modern state was
invented after 1648, the
Treaty of Westphalia--
>> The geopolitical entity.
>> Absolutely.
And they could draw
those boundaries
right down the middle of
an ancient nation or--
>> And often did.
>> --absorb them-- many times.
And the count now is that
there are 5,000 ancient nations
in the world
unrepresented and have
no legal standing because
they were surrounded
by these modern states.
>> Interesting.
Well Charlene, our
time is up for now.
Thank you so much
for being with me.
>> Thank you.
>> Thank you for being with us,
and check your program guide
for part 2 of our two-part
series on body, nature,
and place in a
hypermodern world.
[MUSIC PLAYING]